data-public/derived/README.md, before:

`./data-public/derived/` Directory
=========

This directory should contain only data files that can be derived from the raw data files (ie, those in [`./data-public/raw/`](./data-public/raw/))) **using code contained in this repository**.  Unlike the raw data files, proprietary & binary formats are acceptable, since the repository's code should be able to reproduce them.

When using `R`, the *.rds files are well-suited here, since they are smaller than CSV (thus quicker to load) and persist the metadata (such as factor labels).

the processed raw, unmodified files that serve as an input to the project.  In theory the schema of these data files shouldn't change when new data arrive.  But of course this is frequenlty violated, so at minimum, our code should assert that the required columns are present, and contain reasonable values.  More thorough checking can be warranted.

For the sake of long-term reproducibility, these files are ideally in a nonproprietary format that is human readable.  Plain text files (eg, CSVs & XML) are preferred. Binary & proprietary formats (eg, Excel & SAS) may not be readable if certain softrware is missing from the user's computer; or they might be able to be read by only old versions of software (eg, Excel 97).

## No PHI
Files with PHI should **not** be stored in a GitHub repository, even a private GitHub repository.  We recommend using an enterprise database (such as MySQL or SQL Server) to store the data, and read & write the information to/from the software right before and after it's used.  If a database isn't feasible, consider storing the files in [`./data-unshared/`](./data-unshared/), whose contents are not committed to the repository; a line in [`./.gitignore/`](./.gitignore/) keeps the files uncommitted/unstaged.  However, there could be some information that is sensitive enough that it shouldn't even be stored locally without encryption (such as PHI).

Commit message:

more consistent output of links
closes #50

data-public/derived/README.md, after:

`./data-public/derived/` Directory
=========

### Contents
| File                                                                      | Description                                                                         |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `links-2017-97.csv`<br/>`links-metadata-2017-97.yml`                      | Most recent kinship links for the NLSY97, and some description of the links version |
| `links-archive-2017-79.csv`                                               | Archive of all NLSY79 kinship links                                                 |
| `links-archive-2017-97.csv`                                               | Archive of all NLSY97 kinship links                                                 |
| `outcomes-79-subject-v86.csv`<br/>`outcomes-79-subject.rds`               | Subject measurements in theNLSY79 (only one measurement per subject)                |
| `outcomes-79-subject-survey-v86.csv`<br/>`outcomes-79-subject-survey.rds` | Subject-by-survey measurements in the NLSY79                                        |

**Note**: a [csv](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values) is a plain-text file (comma separated values) that should be readable by almost any data-oriented software, while an [rds](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.4.3/topics/readRDS) is optimized dataset readable in [R](https://www.r-project.org/).




### Description

This directory should contain only data files that can be derived from the raw data files (ie, those in [`./data-public/raw/`](./data-public/raw/)) **using code contained in this repository**.  Unlike the raw data files, proprietary & binary formats are acceptable, since the repository's code should be able to reproduce them.

When using `R`, the *.rds files are well-suited here, since they are smaller than CSV (thus quicker to load) and persist the metadata (such as factor labels).

the processed raw, unmodified files that serve as an input to the project.  In theory the schema of these data files shouldn't change when new data arrive.  But of course this is frequently violated, so at minimum, our code should assert that the required columns are present, and contain reasonable values.  More thorough checking can be warranted.

For the sake of long-term reproducibility, these files are ideally in a nonproprietary format that is human readable.  Plain text files (eg, CSVs & XML) are preferred. Binary & proprietary formats (eg, Excel & SAS) may not be readable if certain software is missing from the user's computer; or they might be able to be read by only old versions of software (eg, Excel 97).

## No PHI
Files with PHI should **not** be stored in a GitHub repository, even a private GitHub repository.  We recommend using an enterprise database (such as MySQL or SQL Server) to store the data, and read & write the information to/from the software right before and after it's used.  If a database isn't feasible, consider storing the files in [`./data-unshared/`](./data-unshared/), whose contents are not committed to the repository; a line in [`./.gitignore/`](./.gitignore/) keeps the files uncommitted/unstaged.  However, there could be some information that is sensitive enough that it shouldn't even be stored locally without encryption (such as PHI).
